---
layout: guide.njk
title: 'Migration Guide: Spectrum Web Components'
displayName: 2023/6/11
slug: migration-guide
---

## Migration: 2023/6/11

As of the 0.33.0 release of the Spectrum Web Components library, we will be leveraging a new version of our Overlay API. We've done our best to ensure a smooth transition from one version of the API to the next, including adding extended support for the argument signature from the previous version. In this way, consumption of elements from the library (e.g. `<overlay-trigger>`, `<sp-picker>`, `<sp-tooltip>`, et al.) or the imperative Overlay API (e.g. `Overlay.open()`) should continue to afford as close to the same functionality as the provided you in the past. Under the covers, many important changes have been made and there are several things you can do in preparation for those changes in your application's lifecycle.

### Remove the `open` attribute from content that is meant to be overlaid.

The `open` attribute will be addressed directly by the Overlay API itself to manage the visual transition from the closed to open state of the overlaid content, and management of this attribute by the parent application could prevent those transitions from occurring as expected.

✅ _DO_ exclude `open` attributes from `slot="*-content"` children of `<overlay-trigger>` elements

```html
<overlay-trigger>
    <sp-button slot="trigger">Trigger</sp-button>
    <sp-popover slot="click-content" placement="bottom">
        <sp-dialog no-divider>Popover for the trigger</sp-dialog>
    </sp-popover>
    <sp-tooltip slot="hover-content" placement="right">
        Tooltip for the trigger
    </sp-tooltip>
    <!-- etc. -->
</overlay-trigger>
```

### Remove usage of `placement="none"` in both declarative and imperative API usages

`placement="none"` or `placement: 'none'` was previously leveraged to outline an overlay that would take the full size of the viewport, this responsibility is now fulfilled by assigning this value as `undefined`, or, better yet, not including it at all.

✅ _DO_ omit `placement` when not specifically relating the overlaid content to its target with the imperative API

```ts
this.closeHoverOverlay = Overlay.open(
    triggerReference,
    'modal',
    contentReference,
    {
        delayed: false,
        offset: 0,
        receivesFocus: 'auto',
    }
);
```

### Ensure that your consumption of `sp-opened` and `sp-closed` events are typed

Some of the internal properties of these events are changing, see `interaction: 'auto' | 'hint' | 'manual' | 'modal' | 'page'`. Ensuring you are consuming these types will allow Typescript to support your upgrade from one version of the API to the next.

✅ _DO_ use the `OverlayOpenCloseDetail` type when listening for these Custom Events

```ts
html`
    <element-containing-an-overlay
        @sp-closed=${(event: OverlayOpenCloseDetail) => {
            if (event.detail.interaction === 'auto') {
                // Do something when the event was dispatched for an overlay with type "auto".
            }
        }}
        @sp-opened=${(event: OverlayOpenCloseDetail) => {
            if (event.detail.interaction === 'modal') {
                // Do something when the event was dispatched for an overlay with type "modal".
            }
        }}
    ></element-containing-an-overlay>
`;
```

### Prepare for descendant overlays to exist in the same DOM tree

Previously, the reparenting of overlay content prevented `sp-opened` and `sp-closed` events from bubbling as would normally be the default. This means you will have the opportunity to hear and respond to these events ALL in a centralized location, but your listeners may hear more of these events than you expect and/or had previously.

✅ _DO_ be sure to gate your listeners if your experience stacks multiple overlays (see submenus) within each other.

```ts
function handleSpOpened(event: OverlayOpenCloseDetail) {
    // Return if the `sp-opened` event was not dispatched from the element to which this listener is attached.
    if (event.target !== event.currentTarget) return;
}
```

<script type="module">
    import '@spectrum-web-components/dialog/sp-dialog.js';
    import '@spectrum-web-components/overlay/overlay-trigger.js';
    import '@spectrum-web-components/popover/sp-popover.js';
    import '@spectrum-web-components/tooltip/sp-tooltip.js';
</script>

## Explanation

The new version of the Overlay API no longer relies on portalling (moving content to the end of the `<body>` element) to defeat CSS clipping and stacking. While this approach was good at overcoming these realities, the reparenting of the overlaid content required to apply this technique had high-performance costs for constantly reorienting elements to a new parent and broke encapsulation, making it difficult to take full control of the delivery of that content as far as styling. In exchange, the new API will leverage `<dialog>` elements and the `showModal()` method for modal overlays and the `popover` attribute along with the `showPopover()` method they add to elements to which they are applied. Both of these APIs lift content onto the [top layer](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) of the browser which provides a full guarantee against CSS clipping and stacking interrupting the content addressed to this layer. Be aware that content on this layer is managed as a strict stack, so the last added will always be "on top" regardless of any additional CSS you may apply. [A discussion](https://github.com/adobe/spectrum-web-components/discussions/2764#discussioncomment-5327797) around additional features that could address this reality is ongoing, please jump in with your thoughts if you have them.

While the [`<dialog>` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/dialog) is widely supported by browsers, the [`popover` attribute](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) is still quite new. There is strong consensus on the API and stable implementations are starting to ship today, However, there will continue to be browsers that do not support this API for some time. To support these browsers, the API will now leverage a `position: fixed` approach to defeat CSS clipping and stacking. This approach has less of a guarantee in overcoming these realities than what was being used previously and [_may_ require intervention on your part](../../components/overlay#fallback-support).
